---
title: "The East vs The West"
date: 2022-11-09
layout: single
author_profile: true
read_time: true
comments: true
---

In Eastern Europe, the institutions are so ill equipped, ineffective, and corrupt in comparison to the west, that this forces a social camaraderie between all members of the society which is largely independent of class or socioeconomic status: if you can't rely on institutions, you must rely on family and friends and, more widely, you share a bond with every countrymen as you are all in this plight together. This leads to a level of socialization that many Americans never even approach... (I'm reminded of an anecdote about a professor, evidently a pretty acid guy, who would cut through hot air with: "that's not even wrong"). Modern Americans can barely hold a 10 minute conversation because of an inability or unwillingness (due to the accepted American culture mores of social interaction) to advance the conversation beyond surface level riff raff. And of course its very difficult for anyone's attention span, regardless of culture of origin, to tolerate much more than a few minutes of this, so most interactions don't even last much longer than that. When an attempt is finally made to broach deeper topics, the inevitable ineptitude and ignorance involved makes such conversation so awkward its most likely to be quickly abandoned out of sheer discomfort. This leads to entire social lives gone the way of micro conversations and small talk about which brunch place is the best akin to something one would conduct with the shop clerk (they don't already know) at the checkout line. In my estimation this is what rests at the root of foreigners' complaints that Americans are "fake", "vapid", or "2-dimensional", at least as it relates to their 1-1 interactions with them.

This shared-plight bonding leads to a real investment in other human beings. Particularly because all cities in Eastern Europe, excluding major population centers somewhat, are quite small: one cannot behave as they wish if the person across from them knows their grandmother, is a priest at the local church, or works behind the desk of a shop they often frequent. They are bound to see them again at a future social gathering or run into them on the street. It's important to note the same aesthetic can be found in the US as well, but mostly in "backwater" regions like rural areas (Nebraska, Oklahoma, the deep south, etc) which are niche relative to the "mainstream" culture.

This tight-knit ethic conveniently reinforces this bond further, however it appears that Bulgarians at least have managed to elevate this at the level of the entire nation, and I suspect this is largely true for other nations in the region as well. The reasons for this are numerous including perceptions, accurate or not, by foreigners (namely the West) that Bulgaria is a backwards nation (technologically it certainly is in a lot of ways) because it is poor (it is) or because, to give an example, Romani gypsies from Bulgaria emigrate to Western Europe to conduct their illicit activities, like pitpocketing, as it is more lucrative and the locals don't know enough to distinguish them from actual Bulgarians. However, Bulgarians and other Balkan Slavs intimately know the truth about themselves. This allows for the ability to create an instant bond with a fellow Slav eliminating any unnecessary overhead with forging social connections, like posturing (there's a saying here "какво ми се правиш" which roughly translates to "stop posturing to me, you're not fooling anyone") or relative positioning (ex. I have more followers than you on Instagram), common in the West. Due to these tough realities, the social yardstick by which you are measured is character, ethics, grit, decency, your word (if you are a man), and the health of your relationship with your family and your community. In the West on the other hand the yard sticks are money, status, and power. If you are a quality human being but relatively prosaic in these regards (as of course are most Americans in reality but their perception of themselves differs, comically in many cases), you're going to have a tough time of it, as you are going to have to pick out others who share similar values in a bevy of climbers of all shapes and sizes: said more directly, narcissists and psychopaths as such behavior is rewarded and revered. Vice versa in Bulgaria, you would have to instead pick out this latter group. In addition, the average Bulgarian simply doesn't have the time or luxury to focus on much of the frivolous decadence that is precisely what is corrupting the social fabric of the west. If you need to pay your electricity bill today and you can't do it online and you have to hustle to make enough money to eat dinner, you don't have a lot of time to contemplate whether you or someone you know was assigned the correct gender at birth

Another issue is the modern American attitude, on a day-to-day basis, toward their employer (wage slavery), the information and activities they consume and partake in, and fundamentally towards the reality they inhabit. It appears to be something of the form of: consuming what is oftentimes absolute and unmistakable evil and dog-shit packaged in a glossy veneer - be it a pretty UX or the next promotion at work - self-deluding that it tastes great, and then asking for more. It's literally the consumerist version of earnestly asking for more lashings from your master. And it is so ingrained that even broaching this reality (in a far more gentle and palatable than I just did) is absolute anathema. You are labeled negative, chastised that this is a safe space where "good vibes only" are permitted, and forever excommunicated from said social group. This is a dead giveaway that the adherents of this worldview have severely impaired reality testing. And far more disturbing is that it is very likely that they have no conception of anything outside of this constructed reality: they are stuck in a dystopian fairy tail constituted by ill-conceived propaganda, advertising, shallow ideological and intellectual frameworks, and other Matrix-esque phenomena, with no means of escape, not the requisite mental faculties nor life experience. Behind every action, there is desire/motivation. And behind desire/motivation is some new understanding. If there is not even the desire/motivation, that indicates there is no understanding.

It's important to note at this point that many of these issues and behaviors are generational. They are promulgated by the internet and thus borderless. It liberated us all, humanity globally, with regard to access to information but simultaneously enslaved us from a neurobiological perspective via the temptation and low-hanging fruit of quick dopamine fixes like 4k pornography, mind-numbing entertainment in the form of Netflix, stunning Instagram reels, asinine Tik Tok 10-second shorts or 200 character Tweets. In other words: largely specious human detritus. The pull of the latter is most strongly felt in gen Z and, from my own observations across the parts of the world I'm acquainted with (basically everything West of Istanbul, inclusively), they are effectively the same everywhere. Their cultural origin now holds the minority sway in their behaviors and attitudes.

With the fall of communism in Bulgaria in 89, the institutional guard shifted from the East (the USSR) to the West overnight. And by now the presence of this western influence is widespread here, so expect things to go the way of the West in due time: they just lag behind by about 5/10 years. The US was a totally different place about 20/30 years ago as well. The 90s were arguably, roughly (this is too broad/high a level of analysis for vague generalizations or assertions) the zenith of Western civilization in the US. The economy was in good shape, before the modern era of flagrant financial manipulation ala quantitative easing and institutionalized market manipulation, the American dream was still within reach, there weren't deep ideological rifts and polarization amongst the populace as there is now (with numerous exceptions - racism was certainly still more ingrained and primitive than it is now). The first tectonic shift was felt around 2007-2010 with the release of the iPhone, the initial rise of social media platforms, and the financial crisis. The next was 2014/2015 with the emergence of postmodernist confabulation/degradation like woke culture, misandry-flavored feminism, body positivity, toxic masculinity (whatever that is...) from the universities. Needless to say none of these things were positive developments.
